add document about stale read transaction (#5809)
pingcap/docs: as-of-timestamp.md

---

> title: Read Historical Data Using the `AS OF TIMESTAMP` Clause

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Perform Stale Read Using the `AS OF TIMESTAMP` Clause
```

| c    |
+------+
|    1 |
|    2 |
|    3 |
+------+
3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

> **Note:**
>
> When reading multiple tables with one `SELECT` statement, you need to make sure that the format of TIMESTAMP EXPRESSIONs is consistent. For example, `select * from t as of timestamp NOW() - INTERVAL 2 SECOND, c as of timestamp NOW() - INTERVAL 2 SECOND;`. In addition, you must specify the as of information for the relevant table in the `SELECT` statement; otherwise, the `SELECT` statement reads the latest data by default.

### Read historical data using the `START TRANSACTION READ ONLY AS OF TIMESTAMP` statement

You can use the [`START TRANSACTION READ ONLY AS OF TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-start-transaction.md) statement to start a read-only transaction based on a time point in the past. The transaction reads historical data from the given history time.

```sql
start transaction read only as of timestamp '2021-05-26 16:45:26';
```

```
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
```

```sql
select * from t;
```

```
+------+
| c    |
+------+
|    1 |
|    2 |
|    3 |
+------+
3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

```sql
commit;
```

```
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
```

> After the transaction is committed, you can read the historical data.

Author: 这个地方的中文“即可读取最新数据”我有点疑问，这个事务事实上进行写操作了吗？如果没有的话，对于 t 表来说“最新”的数据应该还是 1，2，3 吧？那这里 select 到的是一个历史快照？
@Yisaer PTAL. Thanks!

> After the transaction is committed, you can read the historical data.

Reviewer 2: 这里想要表达的意思是，当 Stale read 事务 commit 完后，这个事务就结束了，之后新起的新事务内就能读到最新数据。

> After the transaction is committed, you can read the historical data.

Reviewer 3: 这里应该是 `latest` 的，这个事务单独是一个历史读的事务。提交后用 `select * from` 可以读到最新的。

> After the transaction is committed, you can read the historical data.

Author: Updated. Thanks~

```sql
select * from t;
```

```
+------+
| c    |
+------+
|    1 |
|   22 |
|    3 |
+------+
3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

> **Note:**
>
> If you start a transaction with the statement `START TRANSACTION READ ONLY AS OF TIMESTAMP`, it is a read-only transaction. Write operations are rejected in this transaction.

### Read historical data using the `SET TRANSACTION READ ONLY AS OF TIMESTAMP` statement

You can use the [`SET TRANSACTION READ ONLY AS OF TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-set-transaction.md) statement to set the next transaction as a read-only transaction based on a specified time point in the past. The transaction reads historical data from the given history time.

```sql
set transaction read only as of timestamp '2021-05-26 16:45:26';
```

```
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
```

```sql
begin;
```

```
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
```

```sql
select * from t;
```

```
+------+
| c    |
+------+
|    1 |
|    2 |
|    3 |
+------+
3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

```sql
commit;
```

```
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
```

> After the transaction is committed, you can read the historical data.

Author: Same as L178.
